NITC/CSED/Winter 2020/III Year/CN
18.05.2020
Minutes
The meeting was held to discuss the internal assessment and topics delivery for the third year
B.Tech., CSE courses titled “CS3006D: Computer Networks and CS3093D: Networks
Laboratory”. The meeting details are as follows:
Date and Time
: 18.05.2020 and 9.30 pm to 10.00 pm
Venue
: Online (Through Skype)
The following members were present during the online meeting:
1. Vasudevan, A. R., Course Faculty, CSED
2. Arun Raj Kumar P., Course Faculty, CSED
3. S.Hemanth, III B.Tech. CSE
4. Prabodh T R, III B.Tech. CSE
5. Siddharth Anil Kumar, III B.Tech. CSE
1. CS3006D: Computer Networks
● The topics covered upto March 2020 were informed to all the students through
the lesson plan (sent by an email) and further topics from Transport and Network
Layer such as TCP and UDP Header, TCP Connection process, TCP congestion
Control process, IP Header, Classful and Classless IP addressing, Routing, and
Forwarding to be covered from NPTEL lectures and slides (will be shared to
students)
● The midterm exam was conducted and evaluated for 30 Marks. Students who
missed midterm exams with valid medical reasons (informed prior to the course
faculty) may be given a retest online. Such students should forward the request
mail through FA and HoD for online retest. Last date for sending the request is
31, May 2020. ​ If students have already taken permission from FA and HoD
before lockdown, they could send the scanned copy of the same.
● The assignment components are to be evaluated for 30 Marks. The assignment
includes Mini Project (or) Quiz+Seminar+Report (or) Quiz+Tool demonstration.
● Students chosen Quiz+Seminar+Report are expected to prepare a powerpoint
presentation on the topic RELATED to any of the layers in TCP/IP protocol stack.
The topic need not be from the syllabus. Students may refer to Magazines
related to Networking, select interesting and recent topics for the presentation.
Students should read the article and upload a presentation to the shared dropbox
“CS3006D”​ . Students may submit a report (not more than two pages) on the
same topic answering the following questions:
1. Which layer of the TCP/IP protocol stack, the topic related with?
2. What is the new or novel idea in the topic chosen?
3. What attracted you to choose the topic (technical answer)?
4. How do you see the benefit in coming years in the networking industry?
5. Any drawback or idea that you identified the topic to meet the future
requirements?
Contd. ... (2)●
●
●
-2-
Students chosen for the Mini Project and Quiz+Tool demonstration are expected
to upload their project work (recorded video presentation) to the shared dropbox
A report maximum of two pages describing the hardware, software,
framework/architecture of the demonstrated work with respect to the problem
definition, and the contributions is to be uploaded in the same dropbox.
Students may upload the doc/ppt/video file with name in the format
"RollNo_FirstName.pdf",
"RollNo_FirstName.pptx", "RollNo_FirstName.mp4"
under the corresponding folder in the shared dropbox.
The deadline for uploading the presentations in dropbox is 17, June 2020.
2. CS3093D: Networks Laboratory
● There are 8 exercises in the list of experiments provided for the Networks Lab.
Out of eight, 4 experiments were completed by students and evaluation
completed. 20 internal marks were completed.
● Midterm exam for 20 marks was completed. Students who missed midterm
exams with valid medical reasons (informed prior to the course faculty) may be
given a retest online. Such students should forward the request mail through FA
and HoD for online retest. Last date for sending the request is 31, May 2020. ​ If
students have already taken permission from FA and HoD before lockdown, they
could send the scanned copy of the same.
● The remaining 4 experiments could be completed and the codes could be
uploaded to the dropbox folder titled “CS3093D”.
● The deadline for uploading the experiments in dropbox is 21, June 2020.
● For any queries related to network programming lab, the queries could be posted
in Google classroom for the lab.
***